Move 2201.5.0 release changes to master (#6731)
ballerina-platform/ballerina-dev-website: downloads/swan-lake-release-notes/swan-lake-2201.5.0/RELEASE_NOTE.md

---
layout: ballerina-left-nav-release-notes
title: 2201.5.0 (Swan Lake) 
permalink: /downloads/swan-lake-release-notes/2201.5.0/
active: 2201.5.0
redirect_from: 
    - /downloads/swan-lake-release-notes/2201.5.0
    - /downloads/swan-lake-release-notes/2201.5.0-swan-lake/
    - /downloads/swan-lake-release-notes/2201.5.0-swan-lake
    - /downloads/swan-lake-release-notes/
    - /downloads/swan-lake-release-notes
---

## Overview of Ballerina Swan Lake 2201.5.0

<em>2201.5.0 (Swan Lake Update 5) is the fifth update release of Ballerina Swan Lake, and it includes a new set of features and significant improvements to the compiler, runtime, standard library, and developer tooling. It is based on the 2022R4 version of the Language Specification.</em> 

## Update Ballerina

> Run either of the commands below to directly update to 2201.5.0 using the [Ballerina Update Tool](/learn/cli-documentation/update-tool/).

Reviewer: Needs to be updated now since we are mentioning only one.

Author: Will be fixed in https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-dev-website/pull/6740.

> `bal dist pull 2201.5.0`

Reviewer 2: For this release we need to run `bal update` before this command as we need to get `arm` agent to pull exact JRE

We need to add something like this

1. Run `bal update `to get the latest version of the Update Tool.
2. Run `bal dist pull 2201.5.0` to update get distribution

Reviewer 2: @udda1996

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-dev-website/pull/6740.

## Install Ballerina

If you have not installed Ballerina, download the [installers](/downloads/#swanlake) to install.

> >**Note:** From the release 2201.5.0 onwards, a [new installer](https://dist.ballerina.io/downloads/2201.5.0/ballerina-2201.5.0-swan-lake-macos-arm-x64.pkg) is introduced to support the macOS-ARM platform.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>**Note:** From the 2201.5.0 release onwards, a [new installer](https://dist.ballerina.io/downloads/2201.5.0/ballerina-2201.5.0-swan-lake-macos-arm-x64.pkg) is introduced to support the macOS-ARM platform.
```

    function f1(typedesc<anydata> targetType = <>) returns targetType|json = external;

    // Also a compilation error now.
    function f2(TargetType targetType = <>) returns targetType|json = external;
    ```

- Fixed a bug that allowed using an included record parameter of the same name as that of a field of the parameter record type.
    
    ```ballerina
    type ErrorDetail record {|
        string 'error;
        int code;
        int[] locations?;
    |};
    
    function getError(*ErrorDetail 'error) { // Compilation error now.
    }
    ```

- Improved how the inherent type is chosen when constructing a structural value in the `value:cloneWithType` and `value:fromJsonWithType` functions. Now, if the target type is a union that includes more than one type descriptor such that a value belonging to that type can be constructed, then, the inherent type used will be the first (leftmost) such type descriptor. Hence, the inherent type of the constructed value may differ from what it was previously.
    
    ```ballerina
    type FloatSubtype record {|
        float value;
    |};

    type DecimalSubtype record {|
        decimal value;
    |};

>     public function main() {
>         FloatSubtype x = {value: 0.0};
>         DecimalSubtype|FloatSubtype y = checkpanic x.cloneWithType(); // Inherent type of `y` will be `DecimalSubtype`.
>     }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    public function main() returns error? {
        FloatSubtype x = {value: 0.0};
        DecimalSubtype|FloatSubtype y = check x.cloneWithType(); // Inherent type of `y` will be `DecimalSubtype`.
    }
```

Author: @Nadeeshan96

Reviewer 3: We can change like this

    
    ```ballerina
    public function f1(string? arg0) returns string? {
        return java:toString(Foo_strParamReturns(self.jObj, arg0 is () ? java:createNull() : java:fromString(arg0)));
    }

    public function f2(Foo?[]? arg0) returns Foo?[]?|error {
        handle externalObj = Foo_objArrayParamReturns(self.jObj, check jarrays:toHandle(arg0 ?: [], "Foo"));
        Foo?[]? newObj = [];
        handle[] anyObj = <handle[]>check jarrays:fromHandle(externalObj, "handle");
        int count = anyObj.length();
        foreach int i in 0 ... count - 1 {
            Foo? element = new (anyObj[i]);
            if (newObj is Foo?[]) {
                newObj[i] = element;
            }
        }
        return newObj;
    }
    ```

#### Language Server

- Updated the LSP4J version to 0.15.0.
- Added annotation completions for the tuple member context.
- Added snippet completions for the `string` and `xml` templates.
- Added code action support for regular expressions.
- Added field access completions for template expressions.

#### OpenAPI Tool
- Updated the tool to handle multiple media types with the same return code in the Ballerina service to OpenAPI contract generation. 

> - Added the support to handle the newly introduced `@http:Query` annotation of the `ballerina/http` module in the Ballerina service to OpenAPI contract generation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Added support to handle the newly introduced `@http:Query` annotation of the `ballerina/http` module in the Ballerina service to OpenAPI contract generation.
```

> - Added the support to generate API documentation for the resource functions in the generated Ballerina service. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Added support to generate API documentation for the resource methods in the generated Ballerina service. 
```

Reviewer: Is this an OpenAPI tool improvement?

Author: @NipunaRanasinghe

Reviewer 4: @MaryamZi yes this is an improvement from the openAPI tool side to generate API documentation for resource methods, when generating services from its openAPI contract.

Reviewer 4: @praneesha shall we modify this as `Added support to generate API documentation for the resource methods when generating Ballerina services using openAPI contracts`

---
layout: ballerina-left-nav-release-notes
title: 2201.5.0 (Swan Lake) 
permalink: /downloads/swan-lake-release-notes/2201.5.0/
active: 2201.5.0
redirect_from: 
    - /downloads/swan-lake-release-notes/2201.5.0
    - /downloads/swan-lake-release-notes/2201.5.0-swan-lake/
    - /downloads/swan-lake-release-notes/2201.5.0-swan-lake
    - /downloads/swan-lake-release-notes/
    - /downloads/swan-lake-release-notes
---

## Overview of Ballerina Swan Lake 2201.5.0

> <em>2201.5.0 (Swan Lake Update 5) is the fifth update release of Ballerina Swan Lake, and it includes a new set of features and significant improvements to the compiler, runtime, standard library, and developer tooling. It is based on the 2022R4 version of the Language Specification.</em> 

Reviewer 5: @hasithaa Should we anyway update the version here until new version is released?

Reviewer 6: Let's keep as it is. Since this is already available in the spec.

## Update Ballerina

Run either of the commands below to directly update to 2201.5.0 using the [Ballerina Update Tool](/learn/cli-documentation/update-tool/).

> `bal dist update` (or `bal dist pull 2201.5.0`)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`bal dist pull 2201.5.0`
```

For first update lets include pull command, for patches we can use `dist update`

Author: Fixed.

## Install Ballerina

If you have not installed Ballerina, download the [installers](/downloads/#swanlake) to install.

>**Note:** From the release 2201.5.0 onwards, a [new installer](https://dist.ballerina.io/downloads/2201.5.0/ballerina-2201.5.0-swan-lake-macos-arm-x64.pkg) is introduced to support the macOS-ARM platform.

> ## Backward-incompatible changes

Reviewer 5: Should we have the new features before this as we do in https://ballerina.io/downloads/swan-lake-release-notes/swan-lake-2201.3.0

Reviewer 2: Earlier (2201.3.0) there were multiple backward incompatible sections under multiple components. Now these have been listed under one list. Thats the reason now this is on top

    ```ballerina
    public type TargetType typedesc<anydata>;

    // Already a compilation error.
    function f1(typedesc<anydata> targetType = <>) returns targetType|json = external;

    // Also a compilation error now.
    function f2(TargetType targetType = <>) returns targetType|json = external;
    ```

- Fixed a bug that allowed using an included record parameter of the same name as that of a field of the parameter record type.
    
    ```ballerina
    type ErrorDetail record {|
        string 'error;
        int code;
        int[] locations?;
    |};
    
    function getError(*ErrorDetail 'error) { // Compilation error now.
    }
    ```

- Fixed a bug that chose the inherent type incorrectly when constructing a structural value in the `value:cloneWithType` 
and `value:fromJsonWithType` functions. Now, if the target type is a union that includes more than one type descriptor, 
then, the inherent type used will be the first (leftmost) such type descriptor such that a value belonging to that type 

> can be constructed from the structural value.

Reviewer 7: Mistakenly committed this suggestion. Sorry about it. Please change anything if not applicable.

> can be constructed from the structural value.

Reviewer 8: Lets add this as improvement

> can be constructed from the structural value.

Reviewer 3: Fixed with e36ad3ca50fad758b85208456f3d287143b43692.

    
    ```ballerina
    type FloatSubtype record {|
        float value;
    |};

    type DecimalSubtype record {|
        decimal value;
    |};

    public function main() {
        FloatSubtype x = {value: 0.0};
        DecimalSubtype|FloatSubtype y = checkpanic x.cloneWithType(); // Inherent type of `y` will be `DecimalSubtype`.
    }
    ```

> - Fixed a bug that resulted in inconsistent error messages with the `cloneWithType` operation.

Author: Fixed.

    
    ```ballerina
    type OpenRecord record {
    };

    public function main() {
        [OpenRecord...] tupleVal = [{"nonJson": xml `<a>abc</a>`}];
        json jsonVal = checkpanic tupleVal.cloneWithType();
    }
    ```
    Now, this gives the error below.
    
    ```

>     error: {ballerina/lang.value}ConversionError {"message":"'[OpenRecord...]' value cannot be converted to 'json'"}

Author: Fixed.

>     error: {ballerina/lang.value}ConversionError {"message":"'[OpenRecord...]' value cannot be converted to 'json'"}

Reviewer 3: Addressed with 6640ac137ae9cb7570e4137345dbd86b1e9fd216.

        at ballerina.lang.value.0:cloneWithType(value.bal:114)
           sample:main(sample.bal:6)
    ```

- Improved the error message given in a failure of the `fromJsonWithType` or `cloneWithType` operations when the target type is a union type.
    
    ```ballerina
    public function main() {
        json j = [1, 1.2, "hello"];
        int[]|float[] val = checkpanic j.fromJsonWithType();
    }
    ```
    Now, this gives the error below.
    
    ```
    error: {ballerina/lang.value}ConversionError {"message":"'json[]' value cannot be converted to '(int[]|float[])': 
                {
                  array element '[2]' should be of type 'int', found '"hello"'
                or
                  array element '[2]' should be of type 'float', found '"hello"'
                }"}
        at ballerina.lang.value.0:fromJsonWithType(value.bal:370)
           sample:main(sample.bal:3)
    ```

> - Added validations for the incorrect use of the `@test` annotation (i.e., disallowed the usage of it on resource functions and object methods). Previously, the annotation was ignored and compiled successfully.

Author: @Dilhasha

```ballerina
import ballerina/lang.regexp;
import ballerina/io;

public function main() {
    string:RegExp reg = re `[bB].tt[a-z]*`;
    regexp:Span[] result = reg.findAll("Butter was bought by Betty.");
    io:println(result.length()); // Prints "2".

    regexp:Span span1 = result[0];
    io:println(span1.substring()); // Prints "Butter".

    regexp:Span span2 = result[1];
    io:println(span2.substring()); // Prints "Betty".
}
```

For more information, see the new [RegExp type example](/learn/by-example/regexp-type), [RegExp operations example](/learn/by-example/regexp-operations), [API Documentation](https://lib.ballerina.io/ballerina/lang.regexp/0.0.0), and [Regular expressions feature guide](/learn/distinctive-language-features/advanced-general-purpose-language-features/#regular-expressions).

### Bug fixes

To view other bug fixes, see the [GitHub milestone for Swan Lake 2201.5.0](https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-lang/issues?q=is%3Aissue+label%3ATeam%2FCompilerFE+milestone%3A2201.5.0+is%3Aclosed+label%3AType%2FBug).

## Runtime updates

### New features

#### New Runtime Java APIs

> - Introduced the following API in the `io.ballerina.runtime.api.utils.ValueUtils` class to clone an `anydata` value with another subtype of the `anydata` type.

Author: Fixed.

    ```java
    public static Object convert(Object value, Type targetType);
    ```
- Introduced the `getFunctionName()` and `getPathParameters()` APIs in the runtime `io.ballerina.runtime.api.Environment` class. They provide the Ballerina function name and path parameters associated with an external Java method respectively.

### Improvements

#### Support for command-line arguments of built-in subtypes

The command-line arguments of the Ballerina built-in subtypes are now supported to be parsed as operands.

For the following `main` function,
```ballerina
public function main(byte byteVal, string:Char charVal, int:Signed8 int8Val) {
}
```

the values can be passed through command-line arguments as follows.

```
$ bal run -- 1 b 33
```

#### Support ambiguous union-type configurable variables

When a structural value is provided for a configurable variable of a union type that includes more than one type descriptor, the inherent type used will be the first (leftmost) type descriptor from which the value can be constructed.

For example, in the following Ballerina code,

> ```ballerina

Author: These will be fixed when the MD is converted to HTML.

> ```ballerina

Reviewer: I think we should still fix it here. Given that someone could directly look at the README file and it's also nice to have the same standards maintained.

> ```ballerina

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-dev-website/pull/6740.

    'class: "javalibs.app.App",
    name: "getResource",
    paramTypes: ["io.ballerina.runtime.api.values.BObject", "io.ballerina.runtime.api.values.BArray", "io.ballerina.runtime.api.values.BString"]
} external;
```

can be bound to the following Java method.

```java
public static void getResource(BObject client, BArray path, BString str) {
}
```

#### Improvements in Runtime Java APIs

- Deprecated the `getType` runtime API, which returns an `ObjectType` in the `io.ballerina.runtime.api.values.BObject` class. Instead, a new `getOriginalType` API, which returns the `Type` is introduced to return both the `ObjectType` and the type-reference type.
- Deprecated the `XMLNS` Java constant in the `io.ballerina.runtime.api.values.BXmlItem` runtime class. Instead, the `javax.xml.XMLConstants.XMLNS_ATTRIBUTE` constant needs to be used.

### Bug fixes

To view bug fixes, see the [GitHub milestone for 2201.5.0 (Swan Lake)](https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-lang/issues?q=is%3Aissue+milestone%3A2201.5.0+label%3ATeam%2FjBallerina+label%3AType%2FBug+is%3Aclosed).

## Standard library updates

### New features

#### `http` package

> - Introduced a new HTTP status code error structure.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

- Introduced a new HTTP status code error structure.
```

Reviewer: Some other places that aren't consistent too.

Author: New lines will get fixed automatically when the web pages are rendered.

- Restricted to have only one persist model definition per Ballerina package.
- Removed the `persist push` command support and generate SQL script file in the `persist generate` command. The generated SQL script file needs to be executed manually to create the database table.
- Changed the `persist generate` command to generate all the Ballerina client, types, `db_config` files, and the SQL script files in the `generated/<module_name>` directory.
- Renamed the generated files to the following.
  - `generated_client.bal` -> `persist_client.bal`
  - `generated_types.bal` -> `persist_types.bal`
  - `database_configuration.bal` -> `persist_db_config.bal`
  - `<schema_name>_db_script.sql` -> `script.sql`
- Changed the code in the generated Ballerina client and types files to support the new changes.

### Improvements

#### Bindgen Tool 

- Added the `--with-optional-types`, `--with-optional-types-param`, and `--with-optional-types-return` command options to the `bal bindgen` command, to support handling Java null values via generated bindings. These command options will generate optional (i.e., nilable) types 

>   for parameter or/and return types in generated Ballerina binding functions.

Reviewer: Unnecessary line break? Check other places too.

Author: These will be fixed when the website page is rendered.

Reviewer: Same comment about maintaining the MD file.

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-dev-website/pull/6740.

    Consider the below Java methods and the corresponding Ballerina binding functions generated with and without the new command options.
    ```java
    // Parameters and return types having inbuilt object types (`java.lang.String`).
    public String f1(String str) {
        return str;
    }
    
    // Parameter and return types having external object arrays (`Foo[]`).
    public Foo[] f2(Foo[] fooArray) {
        return fooArray;
    }
    ```
    
    **Without optional types** 
    
    ```bash
    $ bal bindgen
    ```
    
    ```ballerina
    public function f1(string arg0) returns string {
        return java:toString(Foo_strParamReturns(self.jObj, java:fromString(arg0))) ?: "";
    }

    public function f2(Foo[] arg0) returns Foo[]|error {
        handle externalObj = Foo_objArrayParamReturns(self.jObj, check jarrays:toHandle(arg0, "Foo"));
        Foo[] newObj = [];
        handle[] anyObj = <handle[]>check jarrays:fromHandle(externalObj, "handle");
        int count = anyObj.length();
        foreach int i in 0 ... count - 1 {
            Foo element = new (anyObj[i]);
            newObj[i] = element;
        }

>         return newObj;

Reviewer: Is this generated code? Can be improved IMO (e.g., query expressions, ..<, etc.).

Reviewer 4: @MaryamZi yes this is generated code from the bindgen tool

Reviewer: Ack. Maybe we can look into this separately to identify improvements.

Reviewer 4: https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-lang/issues/40222

    }

    public function f2(Foo?[]? arg0) returns Foo?[]?|error {
        handle externalObj = Foo_objArrayParamReturns(self.jObj, check jarrays:toHandle(arg0 ?: [], "Foo"));
        Foo?[]? newObj = [];
        handle[] anyObj = <handle[]>check jarrays:fromHandle(externalObj, "handle");
        int count = anyObj.length();
        foreach int i in 0 ... count - 1 {
            Foo? element = new (anyObj[i]);
            if (newObj is Foo?[]) {
                newObj[i] = element;
            }
        }
        return newObj;
    }
    ```

#### Language Server

- Updated the LSP4J version to 0.15.0.
- Added annotation completions for the tuple member context.
- Added snippet completions for the `string` and `xml` templates.
- Added code action support for regular expressions.
- Added field access completions for template expressions.

#### OpenAPI Tool

- Updated the tool to handle multiple media types with the same return code in the Ballerina service to OpenAPI contract generation. 
- Added support to handle the newly introduced `@http:Query` annotation of the `ballerina/http` module in the Ballerina service to OpenAPI contract generation.

> - Added support to generate API documentation for the resource methods in the generated Ballerina service. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Added support to generate API documentation for resource methods when generating Ballerina services using openAPI contracts.
```
